Alan Iteratively Regresses (#129)
rust-lang/wg-async-foundations: src/vision/status_quo/alan_iteratively_regresses.md

 --> src/main.rs:2:5
  |
2 |     async fn method() { }
  |     -----^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |     |
  |     `async` because of this
  |
  = note: `async` trait functions are not currently supported
  = note: consider using the `async-trait` crate: https://crates.io/crates/async-trait
```

This diagnostic leads Alan to add the [async-trait crate][] as a dependency to his project. Alan then uses the `#[async_trait]` attribute provided by that crate to be able to define `async fn` methods within traits.

When Alan finishes the prototype code, he finds the prototype performance has 20% slower throughput compared to the Java version.

[async-trait crate]: https://crates.io/crates/async-trait
[async-trait transform]: https://crates.io/crates/async-trait#explanation

Alan is disappointed; his experience has been that Rust code performs great, (at least once you managed to get the code to be accepted by the compiler). Alan was not expecting to suffer a 20% performance hit over the Java code.

The DDSplit service is being developed on a Linux machine, so Alan is able use the `perf` tool to gather sampling-based profiling data the async/await port of DDSplit. 

> Looking at a [flamegraph][] for the call stacks, Alan  identified many calls into the memory allocator, and many calls to `memcpy`.

Reviewer: Where the calls high in number or high in terms of % of run time?

Reviewer: (or both)

Author: Good question. It was high in terms of % of run time. (I don't think it was excessively high in terms of # of calls.) I will fix.

Author: resolved in b52d49368bd13043841676cce1b2a350e3fb6674

[flamegraph]: https://crates.io/crates/flamegraph

Alan reaches out to Barbara, as the local Rust expert, for help on how identify where the performance pitfalls are coming from.

Alan asks Barbara whether the problem could be caused by the tokio executor. Barbara says it is hard to know that without more instrumentation. She explains it *could* be that the program is overloading tokio's task scheduler (for example), but it also could be that the application code itself has expensive operations, such as lots of small I/O operations rather than using a buffer.

Alan and Barbara look at the `perf` data. They find the output of `perf report` difficult to navigate and interpret. The data has stack trace fragments available, which gives them a few hints to follow up on. But when they try to make `perf report` annotate the original source, `perf` only shows disassembled machine code, not the original Rust source code. Alan and Barbara both agree that trying to dissect the problem from the machine code is not an attractive strategy.

> For the memory allocator issues, Barbara recommends that Alan try to eliminate the allocation calls and if they cannot be eliminated, then that Alan try tuning the parameters for the global memory allocator, or even switching which global memory allocator he is using. Alan looks at Barbara in despair: his time tweaking GC settings on the Java Virtual Machine taught him that allocator tuning is often a black art.

Reviewer: Why does Barbara recommend eliminating allocation calls? Does Barbara believe they cause the slow down? Is Barbara guessing? Is there any data Barbara has to make the recommendation?

Author: She's recommending it because Alan himself had identified `malloc` as a source of runtime overhead. Barbara says, "rather than try to figure out how to make the `malloc` calls go faster, lets see if we can remove them entirely."

Author: tried to clarify this in commit f62bc9ad01ec63a8573ace93824e816be4663819

For the other two types, Alan responds that the `SuccessCode` is small, and that the error variants are never constructed in his benchmark code. Barbara explains that the size of `Result<T, E>` has to be large enough to hold either variant, and that `memcpy`'ing a result is going to move all of those bytes. Alan investigates and sees that `DistriErr` has variants that embed byte arrays that go up to 50kb in size. Barbara recommends that Alan look into boxing the variants, or the whole `DistriErr` type itself, in order to reduce the cost of moving it around.

Alan uses Barbara's feedback to box some of the data, and this cuts the `memcpy` traffic in the `perf report` to one quarter of what it had been reporting previously.

However, there remains a significant performance delta between the Java version and the Rust version. Alan is not sure his Rust-rewrite attempt is going to get anywhere beyond the prototype stage.

## 🤔 Frequently Asked Questions

> *Here are some standard FAQ to get you started. Feel free to add more!*

Author: addressed in 5d7dc2c89f08a63dd6b51a5d14cfd0b3a0947d04

3. Rust makes some things very explicit, e.g. the distinction between `Box<T>` versus `T` is quite prominent. But Rust's expressive type system also makes it easy to compose types without realizing how large they have gotten.

4. Programmers do not always have a good mental model for where expensive moves are coming from.

5. An important specific instance of (1c.) for the async vision: Native code tools do not have any insight into Rust's async model, as that is even more distant from the execution model of C and C++.

6. We can actually generalize (5.) further: When async performance does not match expectations, developers do not have much insight into whether the performance pitfalls arise from issues deep in the async executor that they have selected, or if the problems come directly from overheads built into the code they themselves have written.

### **What are the sources for this story?**

Discussions with engineers at Amazon Web Services.

### **Why did you choose Alan to tell this story?**

I chose Alan because he is used to Java, where these issues play out differently.

> Java has very mature tooling, including for performance investigations. Alan is frustrated by his attempts to use (or even identify) equivalent tools for Rust.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning what java tools Alan would have reached for in this case?  (Would he have used JConsole/VisualVM/JProfiler?  Eclipse MAT?  Something even more advanced?)

Author: I myself am not an expert in modern Java Profiler technologies. I suppose the main question is whether Alan would reach for a commerical tool like  [JProfiler](https://www.ej-technologies.com/products/jprofiler/overview.html), or if they would only use freely available tools like [VisualVM](https://visualvm.github.io/). Maybe I'll just link to both.

Author: addressed in bcce67bcda80282f1bd96744055d4b87176a88f4

With respect to memory traffic: In Java, every object is handled via a reference, and those references are cheap to copy. (One pays for that convenience in other ways, of course.)

### **How would this story have played out differently for the other characters?**

> From her C and C++ background, [Grace][] probably would avoid letting her types get so large. But then again, C and C++ do not have enums with a payload, so even Grace may have fallen in the same trap that Alan did (of assuming that the cost of moving an enum value is proportional to its current variant, rather than to its type's overall size).

Author: Grace is probably likely to give more informed complaints or at least feedback on how the Rust perf experience compares to C/C++ perf experience. Eg she might report that her experience with gcc based projects have had very useful debuginfo that worked well with perf, while clang-based projects had weaker support there.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From her C and C++ background, [Grace][] probably would avoid letting her types get so large. But then again, C and C++ do not have enums with a payload, so Grace would likely have fallen in the same trap that Alan did (of assuming that the cost of moving an enum value is proportional to its current variant, rather than to its type's overall size).
```

I definitely think Grace would fall into the same trap. I think most programmers don't think about this so actively.

Author: I guess my main point is that if any of our non-Barbara is going to sidestep this mistake, it would be Grace. But I don't object to your suggest change (which I think is orthogonal to the note I put about about whether Grace might have more infomed complaints about perf with Rust vs perf with C/C++).

Author: addressed the two points in 5b656fc3c9b0d7ceda09fd75135519bca021fc66 and 250646b0a7334f5a5e849c3a5ac36bf31eed9114, respectively. (Decided to just take niko's suggestion as written, rather than quibble about what Grace might have done.)

# 😱 Status quo stories: Alan iteratively regresses performance

## 🚧 Warning: Draft status 🚧

This is a draft "status quo" story submitted as part of the brainstorming period. It is derived from real-life experiences of actual Rust users and is meant to reflect some of the challenges that Async Rust programmers face today. 

If you would like to expand on this story, or adjust the answers to the FAQ, feel free to open a PR making edits (but keep in mind that, as they reflect peoples' experiences, status quo stories [cannot be wrong], only inaccurate). Alternatively, you may wish to [add your own status quo story][htvsq]!

## The story

A core part of DistriData, called DDSplit, is in charge of splitting input data records into fragments that are stored on distinct servers, and then reassembling those fragments back into records in response to user queries.

DDSplit was originally implemented using Java code (plus some C, interfaced via JNI). Alan thinks that Rust could provide the same quality of service while requiring less memory, and decides to try reimplementing DDSplit in Rust.

> Alan develops a prototype atop tokio and the [async-trait crate][], leveraging `#[async_trait]`to be able to define `async fn` methods within traits. When Alan finishes the prototype code, he finds the prototype performance has 20% slower throughput compared to the Java version.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps not super important, but where did Alan learn about `async_trait`?

Author: Yeah, let me spell out how that arose.

Author: This was super easy to write: The rustc compiler is actively directly people towards that crate today. :)  Elaborated this detail in 3bc2590641158b021e01f0a2bf65c4875eed339b

Looking at a [flamegraph][] for the call stacks, Alan  identified many calls into the memory allocator, and many calls to `memcpy`.

[flamegraph]: https://crates.io/crates/flamegraph

Alan reaches out to Barbara, as the local Rust expert, for help on how identify where the performance pitfalls are coming from.

Alan asks Barbara whether the problem could be caused by the tokio executor. Barbara says it is hard to know that without more instrumentation. She explains it *could* be that the program is overloading tokio's task scheduler (for example), but it also could be that the application code itself has expensive operations, such as lots of small I/O operations rather than using a buffer.

Alan and Barbara look at the `perf` data. They find the output of `perf report` difficult to navigate and interpret. The data has stack trace fragments available, which gives them a few hints to follow up on. But when they try to make `perf report` annotate the original source, `perf` only shows disassembled machine code, not the original Rust source code. Alan and Barbara both agree that trying to dissect the problem from the machine code is not an attractive strategy.

> For the memory allocator issues, Barbara recommnds that Alan try to eliminate the allocation calls and if they cannot be eliminated, then that Alan try tuning the parameters for the global memory allocator, or even switching which global memory allocator he is using. Alan looks at Barbara in despair: his time tweaking GC settings on the Java Virtual Machine taught him that allocator tuning is often a black art.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For the memory allocator issues, Barbara recommends that Alan try to eliminate the allocation calls and if they cannot be eliminated, then that Alan try tuning the parameters for the global memory allocator, or even switching which global memory allocator he is using. Alan looks at Barbara in despair: his time tweaking GC settings on the Java Virtual Machine taught him that allocator tuning is often a black art.
```

Author: Thanks, fixed in 8b9d4e1284cebf4074f353390934a9368a27920e

For the other two types, Alan responds that the `SuccessCode` is small, and that the error variants are never constructed in his benchmark code. Barbara explains that the size of `Result<T, E>` has to be large enough to hold either variant, and that `memcpy`'ing a result is going to move all of those bytes. Alan investigates and sees that `DistriErr` has variants that embed byte arrays that go up to 50kb in size. Barbara recommends that Alan look into boxing the variants, or the whole `DistriErr` type itself, in order to reduce the cost of moving it around.

Alan uses Barbara's feedback to box some of the data, and this cuts the `memcpy` traffic in the `perf report` to one quarter of what it had been reporting previously.

However, there remains a significant performance delta between the Java version and the Rust version. Alan is not sure his Rust-rewrite attempt is going to get anywhere beyond the prototype stage.

## 🤔 Frequently Asked Questions

*Here are some standard FAQ to get you started. Feel free to add more!*

> ### **What are the morals of the story?**

Reviewer 4: Some other potential morals:
* Lack of certain language features leads to potentially using constructs like `async_trait` which may perform poorly and for which its hard to understand the performance impacts of its usage. 
* In addition to native code tooling understanding C/C++ better than Rust, they also definitely do not have insight into Rust's async model which is even further abstracted from C/C++.

Author: thanks, great points! I added them in 0e5819b18932e1b13b91c34fa28acd89608f48cb
